in the last lecture we have studied
about storage structure under the basics
of operating system and in this lecture
we will be studying about input output
structure which also comes under the
basics of operating system so as we
studied about storage structure in the
previous lecture we see here that
storage is only one of the many types of
input/output devices within a computer
so what are input/output devices
input/output devices are the devices
that are used for either giving input or
getting output from your computer and
storage also is just one of the many
types of input/output devices that we
have so we see that input/output devices
or something that is very important so a
large portion of operating system code
is dedicated to managing IO both because
of its importance to the reliability and
performance of a system and because of
the very nature of the devices so as I
told you since input/output devices and
managing input/output is very important
so when you code the operating system a
very large portion of that code is
dedicated for managing the input/output
and why is that it is because of its
importance to the reliability and
performance of the system the
reliability and performance of a system
greatly depends upon how its input and
output are managed and also because of
the varying nature of the devices we
know that we have different input/output
devices and then all these input/output
devices are very different in nature so
since they are very different or varying
in nature and because it is very
important for the reliability and
performance of a system a large portion
of operating system code is dedicated
for managing this input/output so we see
that a general-purpose computer system
consists of CPUs and multiple device
controllers that are connected through a
common bus now this was something that
we have studied when I started teaching
about operating system let's just go
back and look into it once more so here
when we study
about computer system operation we said
that a general-purpose computer contains
one or more CPUs and a number of device
controllers connected through a common
burst that provides access to shared
memory so here we see that we are having
different devices and these devices they
are connected to a particular device
controllers like this here we see that
the disks are connected to the disk
controllers and then the USB devices
like your mouse keyboard and Printers
were connected to the usb controllers
and monitor is connected to the video
adapter so each device is connected to a
device controller which are connected
via a common bus this line here
represents the common bus and they
provide access to shared memory so that
is what we have said over here and now
each device controller is in charge of a
specific type of device we know that
there are different types of device and
each device controller is in charge of a
specific type of device and this device
controller it maintains two things what
are they
one is a local buffer storage and the
other one is a set of special purpose
registers so we will see why it
maintains this and what is the use of
this as we proceed further but remember
that a device controller maintains a
local buffer storage and a set of
special purpose registers and typically
operating systems have a device driver
for each device controller now we have
talked about device controller now we
are talking about another term called
device driver now operating systems they
have a device driver as well for each
device controller and let's see why do
we have that this device driver
understands the device controller and
presents a uniform interface to the
device to the rest of the operating
system so as I told you these devices
are very different they have a varying
nature as we said and then each device
controller also will be different for
different devices and then how will this
device controllers interact with the
operating system
a proper interface that allows these
device controllers to interact to the
operating system so this device drivers
they understand what kind of nature does
the device controller have and it
provides a uniform interface to the
device to the rest of the operating
system so that is a function of your
device driver now let us see how does a
basic IO operation work so here we will
be seeing the working of an i/o
operation so here we have a diagram and
here is explanation of that so let us
see first of all to start an i/o
operation the device driver loads the
appropriate registers within the device
controller so when an i/o operation has
to be performed by any device so what it
does the respective device driver of
that device it loads the appropriate
registers within the device controller
so when we were talking about device
controller I told you that device
controllers maintains a set of registers
so from these registers the appropriate
registers that are required for
performing that particular input/output
operation will be loaded by the device
driver and then the second point is the
device controller in turns examines the
contents of these registers to determine
what action to take now why does it load
those appropriate registers those
registers are loaded because in that
registers we have the information or the
data about what is the action or what is
the exact input-output operation that
has to be performed so after the device
driver loads those appropriate registers
within the device controller the device
controller will examine the contents of
those registers and determine what
action to take so as I said these
registers will contain the information
about what action to take so the device
controller will examine that in order to
know what is action that has to be taken
and then the controller starts the
transfer of data from the device to its
local buffer so whatever has to be
form that data for that will be
transferred to the local buffer of the
device controller so when I talked about
device controller I told you it has a
local buffer and a set of registers so
we saw what the registers are used for
and now comes the local buffer so the
data from the device is transferred to
the local buffer object device
controller and then once the transfer of
data is complete the device controller
informs the device driver via an
interrupt that it has finished the
operation so we saw that the data was
transferred to the local buffer and then
once the data transfer is complete once
the execution is complete then the
device controller will inform the device
driver that it has finished its
operation
so once operation is finished the device
controller will inform the device driver
and how will it inform it will inform
via an interrupt so I have already
explained in one of the previous lecture
about interrupts so via an interrupt it
will be informed to the device driver by
the device controller that it has
finished his operation when it is done
and then what happens the device driver
then returns control to the operating
system and after it is done the device
driver will return the control to the
operating system so then it can continue
with the other work or tasks that it has
to do now this is the diagram that
represents whatever I was explaining
over here here you have the CPU and here
we have a device and this is the memory
and then when the device has an
input/output request after loading the
registers and everything the device
controller loads is data to the local
buffer and then it goes via the CPU to
the memory so here we have the
instruction execution cycle and the data
movement between the CPU and the memory
and whatever task has to be done will be
done and then the data that has to be
transferred back to the device will be
transferred back and then once
everything is done via an interrupt
tells that I am done with my operation
so this is the diagrammatic
representation of whatever is written
here now we see that there is a
disadvantage to this kind of operation
let's see what it is
this form of interrupt-driven IO is fine
force moving small amount of data but
can produce high overhead when used for
bulk data movement so we see that when
this kind of a system is used it is okay
when it is used for moving small amount
of data but if you want to move or if
you want to do input/output operations
that involve large or bulk amount of
data movement then this is not a very
efficient system why because it is going
to take up so much of your CPU and time
because the CPU is always being
interrupted over here and in order to
solve that what do we do to solve this
problem direct memory access also known
as DMA is used so in order to solve this
problem we have something called direct
memory access called DMA so that one is
used so that is what we represent over
here and let's see what happens in DMA
after setting up buffers pointers and
counters for the i/o devices the device
controller transfers an entire block of
data directly to or from its own buffer
storage to memory with no intervention
by the CPU so even in this direct memory
access the first three points they
remain the same okay they will have to
load the registers buffers and
everything and after doing that instead
of going via the CPU in this way what it
does is that the device controller heat
transfers an entire block of data
directly to the memory from its phone
buffer storage without intervention of
the CPU so in DMA we see that the CPU is
not affected it just goes directly to
the memory so whatever has to be sent to
the memory can be directly sent and
whatever has to be taken back from
the memory also can be directly done
without intervention of the CPU so this
is direct memory access
so in this direct memory access only one
interrupt is generated per block to tell
the device driver that the operation has
completed so here only one interrupt per
block is required but in case of our
other system that we first explained
there will be interrupt per byte of data
that is being transferred so the CPU is
interrupted so many times making it an
inefficient system but here only one
interrupt is generated per block and
when is it generated it is generated to
tell the device driver that the
operation has completed when it is
completed it is generated just to tell
the driver then the operation is
completed so while the device controller
is performing these operations the CPU
is available to accomplish other works
so this is one of the greatest
advantages of this as we said in DMA CPU
is not intervened so even when this i/o
operation is occurring the CPU is free
to perform its other tasks and it will
not be disturbed so this is the
advantage of direct memory access so
that is how input/output operation works
and how DMA works so I hope this was
clear to you this was about the input
output structure which is also the
basics of your operating system so I
hope this was clear to you thank you for
watching and see you in the next one
[Music]
[Applause]
you
[Music]